# Exercise 5: Building CRX packages 

Building a CRX package is simple. We need to put into ZIP JCR content and Vault metadata. And also ensure to append build OSGi bundle(s).
Things are getting more complicated if we want to extract some CRX package contents to separate packages.
So sometimes we want to have the all-in-one package (which installation is fastest) and sometimes we want to skip reinstalling some contents 
to prevent losing content on running AEM instance and in the end installing few separate packages.

GAP is addressing such requirements in a way of full dynamism in composing CRX packages from multiple JCR roots, bundles, etc. 
without a need for restructuring a project.

## Building CRX package with content only

Add in `build.gradle.kts`

```kotlin
plugins {
    // ...
    id("com.cognifide.aem.package")
}
```

Then let's create some package contents, in detail, create files:

*src/main/content/jcr_root/content/dam/workshop/.content.xml*:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<jcr:root xmlns:sling="http://sling.apache.org/jcr/sling/1.0" xmlns:jcr="http://www.jcp.org/jcr/1.0" xmlns:nt="http://www.jcp.org/jcr/nt/1.0"
    jcr:primaryType="sling:Folder">
    <jcr:content
        jcr:primaryType="nt:unstructured"
        jcr:title="Workshop"/>
</jcr:root>
```

*src/main/content/META-INF/vault/filter.xml*:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<workspaceFilter version="1.0">
    <filter root="/content/dam/workshop"/>
</workspaceFilter>
```

That's it. Rest of package metadata files (like *vault/properties.xml*) will be automatically generated by GAP :)

Let's build a package:

```bash
./gradlew :packageCompose
```

See that, built package name is derived from project name (*exercise-05-package-building*). We could override it by writing:

```kotlin
aem {
    tasks {
        packageCompose {
            archiveBaseName.set("workshop")
        }   
    }   
}
```

Still, version, classifier and extension remain the same. That's because `archiveBaseName` instead of `archiveName` was overridden.
It is good to know the difference!

Notice that, at the end of a build package is automatically validated.
Validation requires up-to-date node type definitions stored in built package. 
However, this kind of file is also synchronized from running AEM instance automatically.

During regular development just remember to save that generated file in VCS (*gradle/package/nodetypes.sync.cnd*) 
so that building CRX package without any AEM instance available (e.g on Jenkins) will be also possible.

## Building CRX package with OSGi bundle

As of bundle plugin is extending package plugin, now we need to replace:

```kotlin
plugins {
    // ...
    id("com.cognifide.aem.package")
}
```

with:

```kotlin
plugins {
    // ...
    id("com.cognifide.aem.bundle")
}
```

Be aware that bundle plugin underneath is applying the official Gradle Java Plugin and GAP package plugin.
Its main functionality is running [BND tool](https://bnd.bndtools.org/) to generate OSGi specific attributes for built JAR.

GAP is strongly using paradigm *convention over configuration*. Once we specify:

```
group = "com.company.workshop.aem"
```

Then all other values / OSGi specific attributes in MANIFEST.mf file like: 
*Bundle-SymbolicName*, *Export-Package*, *Sling-Model-Packages* and more will be automatically assigned.

So that the only thing left is to add some code, let's create some OSGi service:

*src/main/java/com/company/workshop/aem/HelloService.java*:

```java
package com.company.workshop.aem;

import org.osgi.service.component.annotations.Component;
import org.osgi.service.component.annotations.Activate;
import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

@Component(service = HelloService.class)
public class HelloService {

    private static final Logger LOG = LoggerFactory.getLogger(HelloService.class);

    @Activate
    protected void activate() {
        LOG.info("Hello service called!");
    }
}
```

And declare compile-time dependencies and repositories from which they could be downloaded:

```kotlin
repositories {
    jcenter()
    maven { url = uri("https://repo.adobe.com/nexus/content/groups/public") }
}

dependencies {
    compileOnly( "org.osgi:osgi.cmpn:6.0.0")
    compileOnly( "org.osgi:org.osgi.core:6.0.0")
    compileOnly( "javax.servlet:servlet-api:2.5")
    compileOnly( "javax.servlet:jsp-api:2.0")
    compileOnly( "javax.jcr:jcr:2.0")
    compileOnly( "org.slf4j:slf4j-api:1.7.25")
    compileOnly( "org.apache.geronimo.specs:geronimo-atinject_1.0_spec:1.0")
    compileOnly( "org.apache.sling:org.apache.sling.api:2.16.4")
    compileOnly( "org.apache.sling:org.apache.sling.jcr.api:2.4.0")
    compileOnly( "org.apache.sling:org.apache.sling.models.api:1.3.6")
    compileOnly( "org.apache.sling:org.apache.sling.settings:1.3.8")
    compileOnly( "com.google.guava:guava:15.0")
    compileOnly( "com.google.code.gson:gson:2.8.2")
    compileOnly( "joda-time:joda-time:2.9.1")

    compileOnly("com.adobe.aem:uber-jar:6.5.0:apis")
}
```

Let's build an OSGi bundle only:

```bash
./gradlew :bundleCompose
```

To build CRX package containing that bundle, simply write as previously:

```bash
./gradlew :packageCompose
```

OK, now let's say that we need to use some Java classes being a part of Jar which is not OSGi bundle.

```kotlin
aem {
    tasks {
        bundleExportEmbed("org.hashids:hashids:1.0.1", "org.hashids")
    }   
}
```

And let's use it:

```java
class HelloService {
    private static final Hashids HASHER = new Hashids();
    
    protected void activate() {
        LOG.info("Hash ID for current timestamp is '{}'", HASHER.encode(System.currentTimeMillis()));
    }
}
```

Method `bundleExportEmbed` is doing 2 things:

* it is appending to OSGi manifest attribute `Export-Package` package to be embed.
* it is adding a project dependency to `compileOnly` configuration.

Another case could be to include an additional bundle into built CRX package.

Simple use `fromJar` method of `packageCompose` task:

```kotlin
aem {
    tasks {
        packageCompose {
            fromJar("org.jsoup:jsoup:1.10.2")
            fromJar("com.github.mickleroy:aem-sass-compiler:1.0.1")
        }   
    }   
}
```

## Deploying CRX packages

Simply write:

```bash
./gradlew :packageDeploy
```

As of deploy task depends on compose, we could omit building CRX packages before running task `packageDeploy`. It will be done automatically.

Notice that, task `packageDeploy` could work longer than when deploying CRX package using Maven and Vault Content Package Plugin.
It is connected with advanced AEM instance stability checking which is performed by GAP after each CRX package deployment.

To disable it, simply append `-Ppackage.deploy.awaited=false`, but then do not be surprised when you will don't know when your application is ready to use.
GAP instance checking is helping in detecting that moment to be able to work more comfortably and preventing requesting built AEM pages when our application is not stable.
